..
   # *******************************************************************************
   # Copyright (c) 2026 Contributors to the Eclipse Foundation
   #
   # See the NOTICE file(s) distributed with this work for additional
   # information regarding copyright ownership.
   #
   # This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
   # terms of the Apache License Version 2.0 which is available at
   # https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
   #
   # SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
   # *******************************************************************************

IPC Protocol
============

This document describes the current on-wire protocol shape and, separately, which parts are actively handled by the implementation.

Implemented protocol phases
---------------------------

The binding currently implements four phases:

1. IPC connection setup
2. service discovery forwarding
3. per-service connection establishment
4. event subscription and event update forwarding

Method transport messages are defined in the public header for protocol completeness, but they are not yet dispatched by ``Gateway_ipc_binding_base``.

End-to-end flow implemented today
---------------------------------

.. uml:: models/current_connection_and_event_flow.puml
   :align: center
   :caption: Current connection and event flow

Transport model
---------------

- The control channel carries fixed-layout, trivially copyable message structs.
- Payload bytes are carried out-of-band in shared memory.
- ``Shared_memory_handle`` identifies the slot and payload size within a peer-owned shared-memory pool.
- ``Shared_memory_metadata`` tells the peer how to open that shared-memory pool.

Message layout
--------------

The implementation sends a ``Message_frame<T>`` over the control channel, where the first byte is the ``Message_type`` discriminator and the remainder is the trivially copyable payload for ``T``.

The public message ids are:

- ``1``: ``Connect``
- ``2``: ``Connect_reply``
- ``3``: ``Request_service``
- ``4``: ``Offer_service``
- ``5``: ``Connect_service``
- ``6``: ``Connect_service_reply``
- ``7``: ``Call_method``
- ``8``: ``Call_method_handle``
- ``9``: ``Call_method_reply``
- ``10``: ``Cancel_method_call``
- ``11``: ``Subscribe_event``
- ``12``: ``Subscribe_event_reply``
- ``13``: ``Event_update``
- ``14``: ``Event_update_request``
- ``15``: ``Payload_consumed``

Core data structures
--------------------

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Service {
     Fixed_string<64> service_id;
     socom::Service_interface::Version version;
   };

   using Instance_id = Fixed_string<64>;
   using Remote_handle = std::uint64_t;
   using Method_invocation = std::uint64_t;

   struct Shared_memory_handle {
     std::uint32_t slot_index;
     std::uint32_t used_bytes;
   };

   struct Shared_memory_metadata {
     Fixed_string<508> path;
     std::uint32_t slot_size;
     std::uint32_t slot_count;
   };

Message semantics
-----------------

``Connect``
~~~~~~~~~~~

Initial handshake message sent automatically by ``Gateway_ipc_binding_client`` when the underlying IPC channel reaches ``kReady``.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Connect {
     Fixed_size_container<Service_instance, kMax_find_service_elements> find_service_elements;
   };

Current implementation note:

- the message is sent and parsed
- ``find_service_elements`` is not yet used by the server-side handler

``Connect_reply``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Acknowledges the control-channel handshake.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Connect_reply {
     bool status;
   };

If ``status`` is true, the client marks itself connected and the shared binding logic may start emitting pending ``Connect_service`` messages.

``Request_service``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sent when the local SOCom runtime requests a service through the registered bridge.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Request_service {
     Service service_id;
     Instance_id instance_id;
     bool in_use;
   };

Current implementation note:

- ``in_use=true`` is handled
- ``in_use=false`` is emitted by the bridge logic, but the receive-side teardown path is still minimal

``Offer_service``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sent when the local runtime discovers or withdraws an offered service.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Offer_service {
     Service service_id;
     Instance_id instance_id;
     bool offered;
   };

If an offered service disappears, the implementation removes local mappings and clears pending connect state for that service key.

``Connect_service``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Requests establishment of a service-specific binding after a local request matches a remote offer.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Connect_service {
     Service service_id;
     Instance_id instance_id;
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Shared_memory_metadata metadata;
     bool in_use;
   };

Semantics:

- ``required_id`` is generated by the requester and later echoed back in ``Connect_service_reply``
- ``metadata`` describes the requester's writable shared-memory pool for this service instance
- ``in_use=false`` tears down the local connector and mapping for that peer/service pair

``Connect_service_reply``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Confirms a service binding and completes the local/remote handle exchange.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Connect_service_reply {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Remote_handle provided_id;
     Shared_memory_metadata metadata;
     std::uint16_t num_methods;
     std::uint16_t num_events;
   };

The receiver uses this to create a local SOCom server connector that represents the remote provider.

``Subscribe_event``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Forwards local event subscription state to the peer that owns the provider-side SOCom client connector.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Subscribe_event {
     Remote_handle provided_id;
     Event_id event_id;
     bool subscribe;
   };

Current implementation note:

- this is the only active event-control message today
- there is no ``Subscribe_event_reply`` handling path yet

``Event_update``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Forwards an event payload stored in the sender's shared memory.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Event_update {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Event_id event_id;
     Shared_memory_handle payload;
   };

The receiver resolves ``required_id`` to peer shared-memory metadata, opens the peer pool read-only, and passes the resulting payload into the local enabled server connector.

``Payload_consumed``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Signals that a previously received payload is no longer needed.

.. code-block:: cpp

   struct Payload_consumed {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Shared_memory_handle handle;
   };

Current implementation note:

- this releases payload ownership on the sender side
- ``required_id`` identifies the service connection so the sender can reclaim from the correct per-service allocation table

Declared but not implemented
----------------------------

The following message types exist in the public protocol header, but ``Gateway_ipc_binding_base::on_receive_message()`` does not handle them yet:

- ``Call_method``
- ``Call_method_handle``
- ``Call_method_reply``
- ``Cancel_method_call``
- ``Subscribe_event_reply``
- ``Event_update_request``

Those messages should be treated as reserved protocol surface until the corresponding binding logic is added.

Method calls
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Method calls can be fire and forget or with responses.
Method calls with responses can be cancelled.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // method call to a method of an offered service
   // receiver must respond with some identifier if not fire_forget
   struct Call_method {
     Remote_handle provided_id;
     Method_id method_id;
     bool fire_and_forget;
     Shared_memory_handle payload;
   };

   // handle for active method call
   struct Call_method_handle {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Method_invocation invocation_id;
   };

   // reply to method call
   struct Call_method_reply {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Method_invocation invocation_id;
     Shared_memory_handle payload;
   };

Events
~~~~~~

Events need to be subscribed to, which can fail.
After subscription event updates are received.
For field support the consumer can request an event update.

.. code-block:: cpp

   // ack or nack to Subscribe_event
   struct Subscribe_event_reply {
     Remote_handle required_id;
     Event_id event_id;
     bool subscribed;
   };

   // request a new event update
   struct Event_update_request {
     Remote_handle provided_id;
     Event_id event_id;
   };
